The heart
is a muscle about the size of your fist.
It lies behind and to the left
of your breastbone, or sternum.
The purpose of the heart
is to pump blood through blood vessels,
arteries, and veins
to all parts of your body.
The inside of the heart
is divided into four chambers.
The top two chambers
are called the atria
and are collection chambers for blood.
The bottom two chambers
are called the ventricles
and receive the blood from the atria
and pump it to the lungs
and the body.
The chambers are separated
by valves,
which control the direction of blood flow.
There are four valves:
Tricuspid,
Pulmonic,
Mitral,
and Aortic.
Circulation begins
at the right side of the heart
where blood from the body
comes to the right atrium.
This blood passes to
the right ventricle
where it is pumped to the lungs
to receive oxygen.
Once it receives oxygen,
it flows to the left atrium
and then to the left ventricle
where it is pumped to the aorta
and the rest of the body.
On the right side of the heart,
the tricuspid valve separates
the right atrium and the right ventricle,
allowing blood to enter the ventricle,
but not flow backwards to the atrium.
Blood flows through the pulmonic valve
to go to the lungs.
On the left side of the heart,
the mitral valve separates the left atrium
and the left ventricle.
Blood flows from the left ventricle
to the aorta
through the aortic valve
and to the rest of the body.
Arteries carry blood with oxygen
and other nutrients throughout the body.
Veins take blood back to the heart,
which pumps it to the lungs
to be oxygenated.
The heart arteries
(coronary arteries)
provide oxygen and nutrients
to the heart muscle.
The right coronary artery
supplies blood to the bottom
and the back of the heart.
The left coronary artery
splits into two vessels.
One branch supplies blood
to the front of the heart.
The other branch delivers blood
to the left side of the heart.
An electric system transmits signals
throughout the heart to control its pumping.
The electrical signal starts
in the sinoatrial or SA node,
which is located in the upper portion
of the right atrium
and is known as the
natural pacemaker of the heart.
The electrical signal passes
down to the lower chambers of the heart
via the atrioventricular
or AV node,
which controls the signals
so the atria contract
before the ventricles.
In the ventricles,
pathways carry the signal throughout
the muscle so that they contract
at the same time to pump blood
to the lungs and through the body.